We are pleased to announce that the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) has named ACDI/VOCA to lead the Feed the Future Mozambique Resiliência Integrada na Nutrição e Agricultura (RESINA) Activity. The program marks ACDI/VOCA’s reentry into Mozambique after four years.



Through the five-year program, ACDI/VOCA and our partners will increase the resilience of smallholder farmers and rural households in target districts in the Zambezia and Nampula provinces of Mozambique. To achieve this, the consortium will implement a local food systems approach that integrates climate change adaptation capacities focusing on innovation, affordable water solutions, and nutrition-sensitive agriculture.



The team will co-create solutions with market actors that build their absorptive, adaptive, and transformative capacities. Efforts will also involve shifting how market actors work with communities to anticipate and respond to shocks. The program is expected to increase the prosperity of at least 50,000 households in Zambezia and Nampula.



ACDI/VOCA’s consortium includes two other organizations: ideiaLab and iDE. ideiaLab is a Mozambican organization that inspires entrepreneurs, supports the development of startups, accelerates the growth of micro, small-, and medium-sized enterprises. It also promotes entrepreneurship and innovation. Over the past 12 years, ideiaLab has catalyzed almost 5,000 Mozambican young entrepreneurs, accelerated the growth of 1,200 businesses, and connected more than 30,000 community members to opportunities in rural and urban areas.



iDE, a global development organization based in the U.S., offers innovative market-led solutions that have been successfully tested in Mozambique. The consortium will also engage other local partners and provincial government representatives during its implementation.







Learn more about the Feed the Future Mozambique RESINA Activity.



Learn more about our work in Mozambique.
    
                

 News  | Cooperative and Agribusiness Development, Nutrition