AgroCenta agents take a moment to pose on the motorbikes they use to reach customers and their farms across Ghana.
    

        
AgroCenta co-founder Francis Obirikorang in Minneapolis


Over the next three months, the technology-driven agricultural platform provider AgroCenta, an investee company of AV Ventures founded in Ghana in 2015, will participate in a prestigious, U.S.-based business acceleration program for tech startups in the food and agricultural sector. 



AgroCenta is the sole food tech company selected from the African continent to participate in the Techstars Farm to Fork Class of 2022. Beginning this July, twelve international startups, including AgroCenta, will spend months enhancing their fundraising activities for U.S. investors and growing their businesses before presenting their business models on “demo day” on October 6 in Minneapolis, Minnesota.



“Our mission is to accelerate the access and adoption of digital financial services for smallholder farmers and other value chain actors in rural communities across Africa.” — AgroCenta



AV Ventures Portfolio Company Reaches New Heights



AgroCenta field agents are pictured here (in T-shirts) meeting with community leaders in a community engagement activity. 


AgroCenta is also one of a dozen portfolio companies of the AV Ventures Ghana fund, managed by AV Ventures, a for-profit subsidiary of ACDI/VOCA. AV Ventures provides innovative, catalytic financing to small- and medium-sized enterprises with strong potential for growth and impact in Africa, Central Asia, and Latin America. That means companies like AgroCenta are showing high-growth and high-impact potential and dynamic, entrepreneurial leadership. Portfolio companies benefit from risk-sharing financial products and a growth-enhancing approach to portfolio management.



Building off the foundations and networks developed by ACDI/VOCA, AV Ventures aims to create systemic change through its investments. AV Ventures leverages ACDI/VOCA’s fifty-plus years of experience in the agriculture sector to create financial and impact returns by providing innovative financing and technical assistance to early and growth stage SMEs in emerging markets.



Solving Challenges in the Global Food System



AgroCenta field agents liaise with value chain actors in various communities and geographic zones in Ghana. 


The 2022 class of the accelerator program, supported by Cargill and Ecolab, will be Techstars’ fifth and largest ever. The accelerator first launched in 2018 with aspirations to shine a spotlight on the state of the global food system. Since then, participating companies from around the world have come together to solve problems from labor to sustainability issues.



AgroCenta and its co-founders Francis Obirikorang and Michael K. Ocansey plan to use this opportunity and the support of AV Ventures to expand their role in helping rural smallholder farmers increase their incomes through improved access to markets and digital payments, savings, micro loans, and pensions through AgroCenta’s digital platforms.







Learn more about AV Ventures.



Learn more about AgroCenta.
    
                

 News  | Access to Finance, Cooperative and Agribusiness Development, Market Systems  | AV Ventures